** Insertion Sort

1. It is one of the easiest and brute force sorting algorithm
2. Insertion sort is used to sort elements in either ascending or descending order
3. In insertion sort, we maintain a sorted part and unsorted part
4. It works just like playing cards i.e picking one card and sorting it with cards in hand already which in turn are sorted
5. With every iteration, one item from unsorted is moved to the sored part
6. First item is picked and considered as sorted
7. Then we start picking from the 2nd elements onwards and start comparing it with the element in sorted part
8. We shift the elements in sorted by one element until an appropriate location is not found for the picked element
9. This continues till all the elements get exhausted


** Time Complexity

1. In the worst case, it will take n to pick all the elements and then at max n shifts to be set to the right position
2. In the best case that is the sorted array we will just pick the elements but on shifting will take place leading it to n time complexity that is every element is traversed at least once
3. Best Time Complexity - 0(n)
4. Average Time Complexity - 0(n^2)
5. Worst Time Complexity - 0(n^2)


** Space Complexity

1. No auxiliary space is required in insertion sort implementation that is we are not using any array, linked list, stack, queue etc to store elements
2. Space complexity = 0(1)


** Analysis

1. Number of comparisions
2. Number of swaps
3. Stable or Unstable
4. Inplace or Outplace


** Example

Given an array which is a nearly sorted (K sorted) array we need to sort the elements in the array
input = [6, 5, 3, 2, 8, 10 ,9, 11]
k = 3
output =  [2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11]

k = 3 indicates that for each element to be sorted there can be max 3 swaps

                     
** Advantages

1. Simple and easy to implement.
2. Stable sorting algorithm.
3. Efficient for small lists and nearly sorted lists.
4. Space-efficient as it is an in-place algorithm.
5. Adoptive. the number of inversions is directly proportional to number of swaps. For example, no swapping happens for a sorted array and it takes O(n) time only.


** Disadvantages

1. Inefficient for large lists.
2. Not as efficient as other sorting algorithms (e.g., merge sort, quick sort) for most cases.


** Applications of Insertion Sort

1. The list is small or nearly sorted.
2. Simplicity and stability are important.
3. Used as a subroutine in Bucket Sort
4. Can be useful when array is already almost sorted (very few inversions)
5. Since Insertion sort is suitable for small sized arrays, it is used in Hybrid Sorting algorithms along with other efficient algorithms like Quick Sort and Merge Sort. When the subarray size becomes small, we switch to insertion sort in these recursive algorithms. For example IntroSort and TimSort use insertions sort.